

Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 71 ABSTRACT Resilience refers to the capacity to withstand, over- come, or recover from serious threat, such as a natural disaster. In  small  towns, community  leaders  are  inti- mately involved with their towns’ response and recovery from a disaster and can see resilience processes, or their absence, virtually  one  person  at  a  time. The  authors interviewed 30 community leaders in two small towns along the Red River of the North, 7 to 8 years after a devastating  flood. Responses  to  the  question, “Based on your experience and observations (in your commu- nity), what  advice  would  you  give  a  similar  commu- nity  that  was  trying  to  recover  from  a  major  flood?” revealed  a  pattern  of  suggestions  consistent  with resilience strategies identified in the psychological lit- erature.  Specifically,  the  strategies  of  taking  action, accepting help from others, engaging in self-discovery, maintaining a realistic long-term perspective, and fos- tering hope and optimism were mentioned repeatedly by  the  respondents. The  authors  also  found  rich  sub- themes  within  each  of  these  general  strategies. These findings  support  the  applicability  of  psychological resilience strategies to a community’s disaster response and recovery processes. Key words: resilience, recovery, leaders, rural INTRODUCTION Natural disasters such as floods stress communi- ties in a number of ways. They may cause damage to private  and  public  property  and  disrupt  basic  and necessary community services (eg, emergency services and  electric  power). How  well  a  community  recovers from  a  flood  depends  partially  on  the  magnitude  of disaster-related  loss  and  the  extent  to  which  lost resources  can  be  replaced  and  remaining  resources applied  to  the  work  of  recovery  and  rebuilding. 1 Recovery  from  a  major  disaster  may  be  particularly stressful  for  small  rural  communities  because  of  the limited financial and personnel resources available. Resilience  involves  the  ability  to  “bounce  back” from difficult experiences, such as a natural disaster, and to produce positive outcomes in spite of stressful circumstances. 2,3 Psychological     theorists     and researchers have conceptualized resilience in various ways: a set of stress-protective factors and attributes, a  process  of  developing  skills  and  strategies  to  cope with  adversity,  and  a  motivational  force  that  con- tributes  to  personal  growth  through  adversity. 4 Although  the  majority  of  studies  in  psychology  on resilience  have  focused  on  individual  characteristics and behaviors, the psychological concept of resilience can  be  extended  to  apply  to  a  community’s  effort  to recover from a disaster. 5 In this article, we apply prin- ciples  of  resilience  to  understanding  the  responses of  community  leaders  who  were  asked,  following  a 500-year flood experience, to give advice to other com- munities facing major disasters. The  American  Psychological  Association 2 (APA) published a list of 10 ways to build resilience, which includes both behavioral and cognitive strategies. The recommended behavioral tools include social support, goal  setting,  taking  decisive  action,  and  self-care. Cognitive strategies include various forms of cognitive reframing  (ie, seeing  the  crisis  as  manageable, accept- ing change as a normal part of living, and taking a long- term perspective),  discovery  of  one’s  strengths  and weaknesses,  building  self-confidence,  and  fostering Strategies for resilience: A qualitative analysis of  rural community leaders’ advice on disaster recovery George A. Youngs, Jr., PhD H. Katherine O’Neill, PhD JEM

hope and optimism. Decisions about which resilience strategies are used in a given situation are influenced by personal characteristics, learning history, and cur- rent  environmental  conditions. Overall, the  process  of building  resilience  requires  persistent  effort  and  flexi- bility in adapting to changing circumstances over time. 2 Models of resilience that delineate specific factors and strategies provide a way of studying how individ- uals respond to stressful situations. We propose that these  models  may  also  provide  a  useful  heuristic  for understanding  community  disaster  response  and recovery efforts. The purpose of this study is to deter- mine  the  extent  to  which  community  leaders’  advice on  how  best  to  respond  and  recover  from  disaster reflects the resilience strategies described in the psy- chological literature. METHODS Community selection This study is part of a larger project that is studying two US communities impacted by the 1997 Red River Flood. The Red River’s watershed begins in southern Minnesota with its headwaters near the border com- munities  of  Wahpeton,  ND,  and  Breckenridge,  MN. The Red River then gently meanders north along the border between North Dakota and Minnesota, crosses the US-Canadian border, and then continues further north through the city of Winnipeg, Manitoba. The  Red  River’s  route  creates  the  Red  River Valley, but  it  takes  a  perceptive  eye  to  see  anything resembling  a  valley  in  the  basin’s  prairie  flatland. When  this  otherwise  modest  river  floods,  it  really floods, spreading  across  miles  of  farmland  and  into the hearts of many river-edge communities. With very few topographical features to stop its flooding waters, even small Red River floods can be major events, but the  1997  Red  River  Flood  exceeded  the  River’s  pre- designated  500-year  flood  level. The  1997  flood  trig- gered one of the largest ever, pre-Katrina city evacu- ations.  Citizens  of  Grand  Forks,  ND,  on  the  Red River’s  west  bank  and  Grand  Forks’  sister  city, East Grand Forks, MN, on the Red River’s east bank had to “get  out  of  town  fast” when  the  flood  waters  topped their opposing levees. Considerable press attention— local  to  international—was  given  to  the  dramatic evacuation  of  these  twin  cities  with  the  penultimate attention grabber of a Presidential visit. Still, there was much more to the story. The raging Red  River  ravished  the  entire  river  valley  with  many heroic  flood  battles  occurring  both  south  and  north  of the “Grand cities,” but in smaller communities and with much  less  attention. We  chose  to  focus  our  research efforts  on  the  flood  battles  of  two  small  towns, Breckenridge, MN, and Drayton, ND. Breckenridge is a community  of  nearly  4,000,  whereas  Drayton  is  just under  1,000. Both  of  the  communities  are  on  the  Red River, but  they  had  very  dissimilar  flood  experiences. Despite  a  ferocious  battle, much  of  Breckenridge  was inundated  by  the  1997  flood.  In  contrast,  Drayton stayed  dry  behind  an  improvised  dike  that  engineers said would not work, but did. Selecting smaller commu- nities such as Breckenridge and Drayton enabled us to identify and interview many, if not most, of the key com- munity leaders in these towns’ distinctive flood fights. Interviewee selection We  interviewed  15  citizens  in  Breckenridge and  another  15  in  Drayton.  With  approval  of  the Institutional  Review  Board  at  North  Dakota  State University,  Fargo,  we  constructed  appropriate  con- sent  forms  indicating  to  respondents  our  desire  to talk  about  “community  perceptions  and  values  and how  these  relate  to  your  town’s  recovery  over  the last several years from the 1997 flood.” We said that the  purpose  of  the  study  was  “to  help  communities and  agencies  guide  people  through  the  recovery process  . . . .” Finally, we  told  interviewees  that  “you have  been  selected  because  we  believe  your  experi- ences  and  perceptions  will  enhance  our  understand- ing of your community.” Our  primary  goal  was  to  focus  on  individuals dealing with community recovery processes; therefore, we selected interviewees who were and are in positions that  give  them  a  community-wide  perspective.  We began by contacting individuals with visible leadership roles. We then expanded our list by asking at the end of each interview “Is there anyone else you know who we should interview as part of this project?” As a result of these efforts, we spoke with a variety of community leaders  including  city  council  members, active  mem- Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 72

Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 73 bers of various nonprofit organizations, business lead- ers, and religious leaders, as well as selected commu- nity  citizens,  outside  the  leadership  structure,  who were directly affected by the flood (eg, lost their home or business). Most participants were male, but we did find  some  gender  diversity  in  the  leadership  struc- tures of both communities (22 males/eight females). Procedure We followed a three-step recruitment process. First, we contacted potential interviewees by letter. Second, we  made  follow-up  phone  calls  to  determine  interest and set times and places for interviews. Third, we met with  each  interviewee,  obtained  a  signed  informed consent  form, and  conducted  the  interview. The  con- sent  form  included  a  request  to  tape  record  intervie- wees’ comments. All participants agreed to have their interviews recorded digitally and/or on audiotape. The interviews generally lasted for an hour and an half  and  were  conducted  in  a  variety  of  locations  from homes, to business establishments, to the local cafe. The interview  team  included  both  the  authors  and  three trained  graduate  student  research  assistants. We  con- ducted  these  interviews  throughout  2004  and  2005, roughly  7  to  8  years  after  the  1997  flood. Despite  this considerable lapse of time, citizens told us that the flood was still a frequent topic of conversation because of the historic  magnitude  of  the  event  and  the  ongoing  com- munity mitigation efforts triggered by the 1997 flood. Questions All  interviews  followed  a  structured  guide  with over 40 open-ended questions. Each question was read out loud and, if needed, followed by prompts, such as, “Could you tell me more?” The focal question for this study  was  the  following: “Based  on  your  experience and  observations  in  Breckenridge/Drayton,  what advice would you give a similar community that was trying  to  recover  from  a  major  flood?” This  question was located near the end of the survey. It came after a series of questions requesting interviewees to reflect on their community’s losses and gains associated with the flood. Thus, respondents had thoroughly discussed their  own  community’s  experiences  by  the  time respondents were asked to give advice to others. Coding Each  interview  was  transcribed  and  coded.  For the aforementioned question, we began, as noted ear- lier, with  an  a  priori  coding  scheme  based  on  the  10 resilience strategies listed by APA. 2 To improve coding reliability, we  reduced  the  10  strategies  to  six  cate- gories  by  combining  similar  strategies  together. Specifically, we combined two action-based strategies (ie, goal-setting and taking action toward goals) into a category  labeled  “taking  action.” We  combined  three cognitive reframing strategies (ie, seeing the crisis as manageable, accepting change as a normal part of liv- ing, and taking a long-term perspective) into one cat- egory  which  we  labeled  “taking  a  realistic  perspec- tive.” We  also  combined  building  self-confidence  and holding a hopeful, optimistic view of the future into a single  category  labeled  “foster  hope  and  optimism.” Thus, our a priori categories consisted of the following resilience strategies: (1) take action; (2) accept support and  help  from  others;  (3)  engage  in  self-discovery; (4)  maintain  a  realistic  perspective;  and  (5)  foster hope  and  optimism. We  found  that  these  categories easily  fit  the  data  and  covered  virtually  all  of  the interviewees’  comments.  However,  we  also  initially included a sixth strategy from the APA list, self-care, that  barely  surfaced  in  respondents’  comments—a point we will discuss at the conclusion of the article. For now, we turn to our results for our five combined APA resilience strategies. RESULTS Our  question  for  this  study  was  completely  open ended  without  any  suggestion  that  we  were  specifi- cally looking for resilience strategies. After we applied the  APA  a  priori  coding,  we  more  closely  examined the comments coded in each general category and fre- quently found internal structures of meaning that we had  not  anticipated. These  subthemes  add  consider- able  richness  to  our  understanding  of  the  more  gen- eral resilience strategies (see Table 1). The general strategies serve as the organizational framework  for  our  presentation  of  the  results  later. We have included from seven to 17 illustrative quotes for  each  general  strategy  for  a  total  of  53  transcript excerpts. The selected quotes come from 73 percent of

our  respondents,  with  each  general  strategy  repre- sented  by  six  to  10  different  respondents. However, we have not included a coded respondent number sys- tem to minimize the possibility that citizens of these small  towns  could  somehow  identify  individuals across multiple quotes. The availability of such a wide variety of quotes and sources per strategy (even just illustrative quotes) reflects both the depth of the data behind  each  resilience  strategy  and  the  extent  to which each strategy is salient across respondents. Take action One  of  the  most  frequent  suggestions  made  by interviewees  was  to  take  action.  The  tone  of  these comments  reflected  a  sense  of  urgency  (ie,  get  in gear!). These comments focused on two action-related themes, coordinate and clean-up. Coordinate. “Well,  the  first  thing  that  I  would  tell them  is  that  it’s  absolutely  essential  that  there  be some kind of coordination for unmet needs.” “. . . volunteer coordination is essential and some- body has to do it, somebody has to coordinate . . . [and ask]  what  skills  do  we  have  and  [what  is]  the  best [way] to use these.” Clean  up. “Quickly  clean  up . . . Because  the  grass starts  getting  greener ...I  think  that  is  the  fastest way to recovery . . .” However, there is more to taking action than just the  initiation  of  activity. Our  respondents  were  con- cerned that future disaster leaders identify the right tasks to do. Taking the right action focused on three themes: do  the  paperwork, listen  to  the  experts, and pursue mitigation projects. Do  the  paperwork. “. . . jump  through  the  hoops.  If small  business  administration  (SBA)  says  do  this paper  in  triplicate, do  it  in  triplicate. Do  it  twice  in triplicate. Don’t  give  up  . . . . there  is  a  lot  of  paper- work . . . but if you don’t do it, you’re not going to get the money.” “Well, I  will  tell  you . . . when  you  have  a  flood, the  more  documentation  you  can  put  down  to  give to  any  government  entity,  whether  it  is  Federal Emergency  Management  Agency  (FEMA)  or  what- ever, the better off you are. The more information you can  put  down—it  will  help  you  in  the  long  run . . . document,  document.  It’s  called  a  paper  trail  and picture taking. If you can take pictures of what is hap- pening, it’s good.” Listen to the experts. “. . . get expert help on board.” “I would also listen to the experts when they come in, the people who have been through it.” Mitigate. “Always  be  on  the  lookout  for  changes or   projects   that   are   going   to   make   you   more    Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 74 Table 1. Themes and subthemes Take action Accept support and  help from others Engage in  self-discovery Maintain a  realistic perspective Foster hope and optimism Coordinate Accept both material and  task support Know resources Task patience General optimism Clean up Accept emotional support Face weaknesses Emotional patience Focused optimism Do the paperwork Avoid false pride Appreciate vulnerability Listen to the experts Trust help-givers Strength from adversity Mitigate Create a cooperative culture  of help-giving/receiving.  Offer real help

self-reliant—that are going to help you to take care of situations more easily. And don’t be afraid to do them.” “Any community that has a threat of flooding will have to come to grips with the fact that they are going to have to have some kind of device to control it.” “. . . get  that  protection  [eg, dikes] . . . [to]  where it doesn’t happen again; that is where people want it.” Overall, community leaders’ advice to take action (coordinate  and  clean-up)  and  to  be  sure  to  take  the right  kind  of  action  (do  the  paperwork, listen  to  the experts,  and  mitigate)  suggest  that  resilience  is  a proactive,   goal-directed   process.   Future   leaders responding and recovering from disaster should avoid “paralysis of analysis” but carefully analyze what it is best to do, nevertheless. Accept support and help from others An often repeated theme in the literature on stress and resilience 6 suggests that obtaining social support provides a critical buffer against stress and assists with recovery following stressful events. Our interviewees clearly wanted to send a message to other communi- ties  that  they  should  reach  out,  make  connections, and seek help. Social support connects those in need to others who can  provide, among  other  things, emotional  comfort, material  necessities,  critical  information,  and  task assistance. 7 Most interviewees focused on importance of  requesting  material  and  task  support, but  others also highlighted the need for emotional support. Accept both material and task support. “. . . be politi- cally active in getting the support of their local repre- sentative  or  whatever . . . to  get  the  assistance  from the government . . .” “Take all the help that you can get .... Whether it’s from other communities, other people, or government.” “Well, certainly take advantage of any grant funds that are available to you.” “Take advantage of all the federal help you possi- bly can.” Accept  emotional  support. “If  there’s  counseling,  go talk to them, if you need it, you know, use the help. So that’s the advice.” “After  you  had  worked  for  2-3  months,  it  was physically  and  emotionally  draining . . . you  didn’t have any more zip . . . and they [outside helpers] got you jump started ....so  take the help.” “. . . Working  together  and  trying  to  boost  one another up and that kind of thing I guess [is what I would advise others to do].” Four  admonitions  emerged  regarding  help  seek- ing. First, do not let your pride get in the way. Second, take the risk of trusting others who offer help. Third, create a cooperative culture for exchanging help giv- ing and receiving. Fourth, if you offer help, offer real help. Avoid false pride. “. . . accept the help . . . Some people have got a lot of pride . . . “I don’t need any help,” yes you do, take it!” “. . . we   saw   other   communities   come   in   to help .... which  embarrassed  us ....We  had  kids that actually took the sandbags out of my yard ...We were sitting there worrying how we were going to get our sandbags off and . . . [the bags disappeared].” “[We came] . . . to the realization that if we would had  been  willing  to  take  advantage  of  some  of  those programs . . . our buyout program could have started a year sooner. A lot of things could have happened a lot faster.” Trust help-givers. “A person doesn’t agree with these people  when  they  come  in, but, sometimes, you  have to work with them. Our council did a really good job of telling them that is not a plan that will work for us in [our town], [so] what else can you do for us? They were more than happy to say we can figure something else  out  for  you, we  will  work  together. You  don’t  let them come in and decide what is best for you and be done with it. They are people too. They are willing to work  with  you  if  you  show  them  you  are  positive about something.” Create a cooperative culture of help-giving/receiving. “[Remember]  that  they  should  stick  together  after- wards like they did during .... After the flood is over, you [are] a little less likely to show up and help ....” “Stay united, work together.” Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 75

“Stick together.” “Involve as many people in the community as you can. Let everybody have a voice.” “Well, work  together. Don’t  spend  too  much  time pondering the decisions that others made.” Offer real help. “How about if I came in here with the church and the church came in and said what do you need?  Well, what  do  you  think  I  need?  Well  that’s  a nice question to ask, but if they’d ask . . . I’ll tell you you’re  going  to  need  the  power  washers  the   ...etc, anything else, if you’ve got an idea let us know.” Thus, the tone of interviewees’ advice was blunt— do you, as a community leader, have a problem asking for  help?  Well,  get  over  it,  and  get  over  it,  now! Similarly,  these  interviewers  were  blunt  about  the type  of  help  communities  will  need. Although  there was recognition of the importance of emotional help, the  interviewees  seemed  to  focus  on  material  and task support. If, as noted earlier, taking action is seen as a key to recovery, then seeking action-related help is also perceived to be central to bouncing back. Engage in self-discovery Presumably, one can face future disasters better if one learns from past disasters. Embark on a path of self-discovery. “Know thyself,” and you can deal more robustly with the future. At the individual level, this admonition  suggests  that  you  should  identify  which responses,  strategies,  and  actions  to  eliminate  or enhance, based on their effectiveness in meeting the challenges  posed  by  the  disaster. At  the  community level, “know thyself ” seems to reflect a similar process of  examining  strengths  and  weaknesses  in  respond- ing to the disaster. Specifically,  gaining  self-knowledge  at  the  com- munity level is clearly a multidimensional endeavor. First, it involves identifying resources to address dis- aster-related  needs.  For  example,  one  respondent commented on the role of a disaster-based, temporary Unmet  Needs  Committee  in  helping  the  community to identify resources that would be available for future disasters. Second, self-discovery involves facing a com- munity’s  weaknesses. Third,  part  of  self-discovery  is gaining a philosophical appreciation for a community’s vulnerability  before  the  forces  of  nature.  Finally, respondents  embraced  the  discovery  of  strength through adversity. Know   resources. “. . . is   there   an   Unmet   Needs Committee . . . now?  No ...[but] we have  file  draw- ers filled with how to start it up immediately.” Face  weaknesses. “. . . first  of  all,  evaluate  where their weak spots are . . . .we had a history of flooding, so we had identified all the issues ....” “Whether it is putting up a levee system or mov- ing  away  from  the  river. It  is  such  an  overwhelming event that you have to take precautions from having the water inundate the land or the city because that is something that you probably will not recover from. Coming to grips with reality. If you have flood poten- tial you better get serious quick.” Appreciate  vulnerability. “It  is  hard  to  fight  Mother Nature. Mother Nature rules and water is going to go where  it  really  has  to  go .... There  is  [sic]  so  many unknowns [that]  . . . you really don’t know what you should be ready for.” “Each  natural  disaster  is  different  and  unpre- dictable . . . .Whoever  thought  in  this  flat  land  that the Coast Guard would take us up to our house in a boat?” Strength  from  adversity. “The  cool  thing  is  that  you really  find  out  who  your  friends  are  and  what  your community is made of ....” “. . . If  you  really  like  the  community,  like  the area, like the people, then it’s worth staying there.” Overall,  interviewees’  comments  about  self-dis- covery  suggest  that  it  has  two  dimensions, practical and  philosophical. The  practical  side  involves  learn- ing  about  community  resources  and  learning  how  to use those resources in disaster. The philosophical side involves  learning  the  lessons  of  life  that  a  disaster can teach. Ironically, this process of self-discovery is a double-edged  sword  for  community  resilience.  Not only can you discover resources that you did not know you had and strength of character that you had never tested, but  you  may  also  discover  that  your  well  of Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 76

resources is shallow and that you are vulnerable to an extent you had never before appreciated. Maintain a realistic perspective Another  type  of  advice  that  community  leaders gave  was  to  admonish  other  communities  to  have  a realistic  view  of  the  long-term  nature  of  disaster recovery. For the most part, this involved encourage- ment  to  be  patient. Several  interviewees  focused  on task patience, that is, the need to recognize how long it takes to complete recovery tasks. Others focused on emotional  patience.  To  these  interviewees,  it  was important  to  tell  individuals  in  another  community that there will be light at the end of the tunnel. Task  patience. “What  I  can  tell  you  is  that  if  you think it’s going to be over quickly, if you think you’re going to bounce back quickly, it’s not going to happen. It takes at least 5 months . . .” “. . . it  takes  a  while  to  get  everything  like  hous- ing developments started and roads redone and dikes built and all that kind of stuff ....” “It’s been a long haul for us.” “A small town with not very many people, but we are actually just to the point now, 8 years later, where we’re  kind  of  resting  a  little  bit  from  all  of  our  proj- ects.” “Have  some  patience  because  it  is  going  to  take awhile to work through all the studies and grants and everything else. It is a slow process during the recov- ery period.” “They have to be persistent.” Emotional patience. “[Know that] you will get over it. You will survive.” “I guess, just go on, to keep on . . .” “Patience. Be patient.” “Just hang in there and be patient and stuff like that.” “. . . eventually  things  do  work  out.  It  will  get back to normal again. Stay strong. Don’t give up.” “Physically it is quicker than emotionally because people were just spent after the physical work.” Our  community  leaders  learned  firsthand  how much time it takes and how much of an emotional toll it  can  take  to  respond  and  recover  from  a  disaster. Help  giving  in  a  rural  setting  requires  tremendous patience. 8 The resources are limited; formal help givers are  few  and  far  away;  and  most  leaders  personally know most victims. In addition, our leaders still have their own full-time jobs and family responsibilities to meet. Thus, our community leaders want future, small town  leaders  to  be  patient  with  the  numerous demands that disasters will trigger. Foster hope and optimism Being  patient  with  the  task  challenges  and  emo- tional  lows  of  the  present  provides  the  cognitive  and emotional space for hope to emerge. Many of our inter- viewees  offered  hope  to  fellow  communities  dealing with  disaster. These  statements  of  hope  took  several forms, from  general  optimism  to  focusing  on  specific projects and people, such as rebuilding a “new” town, engaging  in  mitigation  efforts, and  ultimately, trust- ing the wisdom and dedication of community leaders. General optimism. “Look to the future ....” “. . . It does get better.” “It  probably  won’t  take  as  long  as  you  think  to recover from what you have experienced.” “There  are  always  people  out  there  that  will  tell you it cannot be done; you have to fight that off.” Focused optimism. “. . . what gets rebuilt can be bet- ter in many aspects. It really can be better.” “You  just  hope  and  pray  that  it  [mitigation] works. Just  like  this  [flood]  diversion, you  just  hope that it works.” “Don’t give up hope . . . city officials may not, you may  not  always  like  them, they  may  give  you  a  bad taste  in  your  mouth  after  you  get  to  see  a  different side  of  them  during  a  disaster,  but  still  they  are trained  to  serve  the  public’s  best  interest. They  will, they will make time . . .” The   aforementioned   comments   on   hope   are instructive  in  two  respects. First, they  suggest  that hope  can  be  both  a  general  mindset  and  a  focused belief  in  the  potential  value  of  specific  projects  and people. Second, and  more  surprising, the  comments on  hope  are  tepid  at  best.  These  interviewees  are Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 77

discussing a disaster that happened 7 or more years earlier,  but,  there  is  as  much  angst  in  the  above quotes as there is optimism. It’s almost as if intervie- wees are telling others, “You should hope that things will be better—maybe, I think.” In the face of a major disaster, hope appears to be a fragile emotion. DISCUSSION When asked to offer advice to another community facing disaster, our interviewees were ready to do so. Take  action. Seek  help. Discover  your  strengths  and weaknesses. Be patient. Hope. These are the sugges- tions that come from the literature on resilience, and they  are  the  suggestions  that  are  clearly  echoed  by our interviewees. So,  what  have  we  learned?  First,  these  sugges- tions  are  not  just  platitudes. They  come  from  people who  have  been  on  the  front  line  of  a  major  disaster. There  is  an  emotional  intensity  in  some  of  the  com- ments similar to what one might hear in the voice of a parent pleading with a child to listen and learn life’s lessons before it is too late. Second, there  is  an  inner  richness  to  be  found  in these simple suggestions. Take action means something very specific to these interviewees. It means coordinate, clean-up, do the paperwork, listen to experts, and do it  right.  Seek  help  means  set  aside  your  pride  and make  connections.  Self-discovery  is  both  practical and  philosophical—learn  about  your  community’s resources, learn  about  your  community’s  vulnerabil- ity, and  learn  about  your  community’s  character. Be patient  means  be  patient  with  everything, emotions, projects, and people. Hope means hope for the future, but  also  do  not  lose  faith. It  is  the  inner  richness  of these  resilience  suggestions  that  makes  them  come alive for communities facing disaster in the future. Third, the  emphasis  that  interviewees  placed  on taking  action  and  seeking  help  provides  a  road  map for outside experts who wish to offer help. Community leaders want help and appreciate the need for outside expertise. They  also  know  that  they  have  to  do  the paperwork necessary to get expert help—they have to jump through the hoops. These comments all suggest that outside experts will be welcomed and respected. However,  it  is  also  clear  that  outside  experts  are expected  to  jump  through  some  hoops  as  well. They need  to  respect  how  hard  it  is  to  ask  for  help. They also need to provide real help. If you are going to help, bring real resources and a willingness to take action yourself. An outsider’s expertise will be respected if it is demonstrated rather than flaunted. Fourth, the strategies of resilience are a means to an end. Taking decisive action, maintaining a realistic perspective, and other strategies are methods by which communities can restore damaged resources and pro- tect against future loss. Many of the community lead- ers’  comments  had  to  do  with  obtaining  knowledge and accessing funds to fuel recovery efforts. For exam- ple, the resilience strategy of accepting help is used to obtain expert advice on how to access emergency funds to repair homes and public structures, and the strat- egy of maintaining a realistic perspective (ie, having patience) is applied toward the goal of pursuing long- term mitigation projects. Findings of this study fit well with the literature on community disaster recovery. In a landmark study, Rubin  et  al. 9 studied  communities  recovering  from major disasters, focusing specifically on decisions made by  public  officials  and  their  impact  on  the  recovery process. They  identified  three  essential  elements  for timely  and  cost-effective  community  recovery:  per- sonal leadership, the ability to act, and knowledge of what to do. Our findings are consistent with those of Rubin and colleagues in several important ways. First, town  leaders  embraced  the  personal  qualities  of resilience  and  applied  them  to  leadership  of  the  com- munity  at  large. Second, our  respondents  repeatedly emphasized the importance of taking action, including administrative action (eg, doing necessary paperwork) and  obtaining  needed  resources  (eg,  federal  assis- tance). Finally, community leaders recognized the need for  information  about  how  to  respond  to  the  disaster and  sought  expert  advice  to  supplement  their  own experience in dealing with hazards such as flooding. Future research needs to examine resilience and recovery  over  the  long  term. Research  on  long-term disaster effects supports the notion that replacing lost resources is important to recovery. Hobfoll et al. 10 sug- gest that, in the  wake of disaster, basic practical and physical needs must first be met to foster community Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 78

recovery and protect against long-term psychological distress.  The  emotional  reactions  of  children  and adults to disaster have been linked to several aspects of the recovery environment (eg, social support, finan- cial  assistance,  and  restoration  of  community  serv- ices). Persistent disaster-related disruptions in home and  work  environments  can  have  a  negative  impact on  family  functioning  and  may  contribute  to  higher rates  of  depression, anxiety, anger, and  suicidality. 11 Arata  et  al. 12 found  significant  emotional  and  physi- cal  distress  among  fishermen  who  had  experienced deterioration  in  social  relationships  and  persistent financial losses secondary to a catastrophic oil spill 6 years earlier. Mitigation efforts may serve to enhance personal  and  community  resilience  against  future disaster  events  by  protecting  vital  resources  and enhancing  community  cohesion. 10 Presumably,  the resilience  strategies  offered  by  our  community  lead- ers, including taking action and seeking help, should promote the successful replacement of lost resources, the maintenance of social support linkages, and effec- tive  mitigation  efforts.  Our  next  research  effort— already  underway—will  be  to  explore  the  10-year impact   of   the   flood   on   community   citizens   in Breckenridge  through  a  random  sample  of  respon- dents  and  the  inclusion  of  multiple  measures  of  net loss/gain  from  the  1997  flood  as  well  as  measures  of current well being. A  final  observation  about  the  advice  given  by community leaders is the relative lack of recommen- dations for self-care. In fact, only two comments among the dozens collected across 30 interviews reflected this concept.  Because  we  did  not  specifically  ask  about the use of each resilience strategy, we can only specu- late about reasons why self-care was not emphasized. One possibility is that, for small towns facing a major flood, the demands of the crisis were too great to allow community leaders to take time for rest and relaxation. Community leaders were under pressure to work  long and hard to protect the town against the flood threat and  to  aid  citizens  in  the  recovery  process  once  the floodwaters had receded. In fact, had the leaders and residents of Drayton not engaged in a frantic, round- the-clock  effort  to  construct  a  temporary  dike,  they might very well have lost their town to the floodwaters. During a prolonged recovery process, community leaders are charged with planning, funding, and car- rying out rebuilding and mitigation projects, in addi- tion  to  the  normal  responsibilities  of  their  offices. Community leaders and residents are forced to sacri- fice personal wellbeing for the survival of the commu- nity  under  such  circumstances. However, the  neglect of  self-care  comes  at  a  high  cost.  Many  of  the  com- ments about accepting emotional support from others, having  patience  with  the  recovery  process, and  hold- ing onto a seemingly fragile hope in the future reflect a  sense  of  weariness  brought  about  by  the  prolonged stress of disaster recovery. So, if we may conclude with our own bit of advice to community leaders facing dis- aster, please add self-care as much as realistically pos- sible to the remaining resilience strategies advocated by those who have already faced disaster. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Various  portions  of  the  findings  reported  in  this  article  were included  in  poster  presentations  at  the  Disaster  Mental  Health Institute Conference (Rapid City, SD, 2006); the annual meetings of the North Dakota Psychology Association (Fargo, ND, 2006); and the Wellness  Fair  for  the  North  Dakota  Development  Center  (Grafton, ND,   2006).   This   research   was   generously   funded   by   the International Water Institute (formerly Red River Basin Institute), Fargo,  ND,  under  the  title,  “Community  Perceptions  and  Values Related to a Floodplain Identity in the Red River Basin.” The con- ceptual and technical assistance of John Sinclair and Toni Morris- Oswald,  University  of  Manitoba,  is  gratefully  acknowledged. The authors also are grateful to Tammy Karlgaard for conducting inter- views and to research assistants Elizabeth Pearce, Candice Jostad, Megan  Hass,  and  Carol  Cwiak,  North  Dakota  State  University, Fargo, ND. (All people noted in the acknowledgements have granted written permission via e-mail for their inclusion.) George  A.  Youngs,  Jr.,  PhD,  Professor  of  Sociology  and  Emergency Management, Department of Sociology, Anthropology, and Emergency Management, North Dakota State University, Fargo, North Dakota. H.   Katherine   O’Neill,   PhD,   Assistant   Professor   of   Psychology, Department  of  Psychology,  North  Dakota  State  University,  Fargo, North Dakota. REFERENCES 1. Hobfoll  SE, Freedy  JR, Green  BL, et  al.: Coping  in  reaction  to extreme stress: The roles of resource loss and resource availability. In  Zeidner  M,  Endler  NS  (eds.): Handbook  of  Coping:  Theory, Research, and Applications. Oxford, England: Wiley, 1996: 322-349. 2.  American  Psychological  Association: The  Road  to  Resilience . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2002. 3.  Masten  AS:  Ordinary  magic:  Resilience  processes  in  develop- ment. Am Psychol. 2001; 56(3): 227-238. 4.  Richardson  GE:  The  metatheory  of  resilience  and  resiliency. J Clin Psychol . 2002; 58(3): 307-321. Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 79

5. Sonn CC, Fisher AT: Sense of community: Community resilient responses to oppressions and change. J Community Psychol . 1988; 26(5): 457-472. 6. Wolkow KI, Ferguson HB: Community factors in the development of  resiliency:  Considerations  and  future  directions. Community Ment Health J . 2001; 37: 489-498. 7. Cutrona CE, Russell D: Type of social support and specific stress: Toward a theory of optimal matching. In Sarason IG, Sarason BR, Price  GR  (eds.): Social  Support: An  Interactional  View . New York: Wiley, 1990: 319-366. 8. Echterling  LG, Bradfield  C, Wylie  ML: Responses  of  urban  and rural ministers to a natural disaster. J Rural Community Psychol. 1988; 9: 36-46. 9. Rubin CB, Saperstein MD, Barbee DG: Community Recovery from a Major Natural Disaster. Program on Environment and Behavior Monograph  41 .  Boulder,  CO:  University  of  Colorado  Institute  of Behavioral Science, 1985: 15-34. 10. Hobfoll SE, Briggs S, Wells J: Community stress and resources: Actions  and  reactions. In  Hobfoll  SE, deVries  MW  (eds.): Extreme Stress  and  Communities:  Impact  and  Intervention. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic, 1995: 137-158. 11. Silverman WK, LaGreca AM: Children experiencing disasters: Definitions, reactions, and predictors of outcomes. In LaGreca AM, Silverman WK, Vernberg EM, et al. (eds.): Helping Children Cope with Disasters and Terrorism. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2002: 11-34. 12. Arata  CM, Picou  JS, Johnson  GD, et  al.: Coping  with  techno- logical  disaster: An  application  of  the  conservation  of  resoureces model  to  the   Exxon  Valdez   oil  spill. J  Trauma  Stress. 2000;  13: 23-39. Journal of Emergency Management Vol. 6, No. 5, September/October 2008 80