

JEM 123 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue Practical flood risk reduction strategies in South Sudan John V. Mayen, MS Erik Wood, MS Tim Frazier, PhD ABSTRACT More extreme weather patterns caused by climate  change are leading to more intense and frequent flood- ing  in  some  of  the  world’s  most  vulnerable  locations.   The Republic of South Sudan faces obstacles mitigat- ing  rivers  and  urban  floods  caused  by  heavy  rainfall   in many of its regions. Through a focused review of the  related literature, this study will first analyze the effec- tiveness  and  failures  of  the  South  Sudanese  govern- ment’s attempts to mitigate flood risks, save lives, and  prevent property damage. Study data are derived from  various sources including peer-reviewed research, gov- ernment and nongovernment documents, and the news  media. Next, using similar qualitative review methods,  a parallel case study from Bangladesh will be used to  glean  comparative  findings  and  help  formulate  flood   risk  reduction  recommendations  for  South  Sudan.   Findings  include  that  government  efforts  are  highly   reactive and lack adequate resources to address flood  mitigation. Analysis also indicates that locally driven  structural  and  nonstructural  disaster  risk  reduction   efforts  are  critical  to  reducing  vulnerability  to  this   ongoing  and  intensifying  threat.  The  study  implica- tions  and  recommendations  advance  the  existing   literature on this topic and are relevant to any global  region  displaying  vulnerability  opposite  the  complex   threat of repeated intense flooding. Key   words:   Flood   hazard,   climate   change,        emergency   management,   disaster   risk   reduction,    South Sudan INTRODUCTION Floods  are  the  deadliest  natural  disasters  with   frequent  occurrences  worldwide. 1,2   Extreme  weather   events  caused  by  climate  change  will  bring  more   frequent  and  intense  flood-related  disasters  in  the   next decade. 3-6  Meanwhile, the literature continues to  support that low-income status (poverty) is a leading  variable  of  global  vulnerability. 7-9   “People  living  in   poverty are particularly vulnerable to shocks, includ- ing  those  caused  by  natural  disasters  such  as  floods   and  droughts.” 4   Floods  result  from  heavy  rainfall,   hurricanes,  storm  surge,  tsunamis,  river  overflow,   dam  failures,  overfilled  urban  drainage  basins,  and   snowmelt.  Predicting  and  mitigating  against  flood- ing  is  challenging  when  communities  or  the  country   at  risk  has  limited  resources  or  expertise  in  imple- menting planning, mitigation, recovery, and response  strategies. 4  Mitigating flood hazards requires deploy- ing  best  practices  and  structural  and  nonstructural   approaches  to  strengthen  communities’  ability  to   adapt,  withstand,  and  rapidly  recover. 10   This  study   adopts the International Federation of the Red Cross  definition of vulnerability as the ability of a person or  group of people to cope with, resist, and recover from  a hazard, such as repeated flooding. 11 Country background South  Sudan  is  a  landlocked  country  (slightly   smaller than Texas) of just over 12 million people—80  percent of which reside in rural areas. 12  It is made up  of 10 states and bordered by Sudan, Ethiopia, Kenya,  Uganda,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  and  the   Central  African  Republic. 13   South  Sudan  is  a  rela- tively new country, established on July 9, 2011, after  a  long-fought  civil  war  from  1983  to  2005  between   North  and  South  which  claimed  over  2.5  million   lives  and  produced  more  than  4  million  internally   DOI:10.5055/jem.0669 SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   123 26/07/22   2:15 PM

124 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue displaced  persons  (IDPs). 14,15   The  war  came  to  an   end  with  the  signing  of  the  Comprehensive  Peace   Agreement  (CPA)  supported  by  the  United  States   and  the  United  Nations. 16   Within  South  Sudan,  the   two  most  powerful  warring  factions  led  by  President   Salva  Kiir  and  Vice  President  Riek  Machar  signed   a  peace  treaty  that  is  widely  believed  to  be  a  frag- ile  accord  that  could  fail. 17   Additionally,  during  this   protracted  warring  period,  the  development  of  criti- cal  infrastructure  that  could  mitigate  natural  dis- asters,  namely,  floods,  in  South  Sudan  was  delayed   and  remains  severely  underdeveloped. 15   Mitigating   flood risk is vital for supporting community lifelines,  continuous  critical  business,  government  functions,   security, public health, and safety. 18 The  climate  in  South  Sudan  is  tropical—hot  all   year  round,  dry  in  winter,  rainy  in  summer,  with   less  heat  and  more  humidity  in  winter.  South  Sudan   is  vulnerable  to  several  natural  hazards,  including   drought,  floods,  and  climate  change  variabilities  that   are  likely  to  negatively  impact  agriculture  due  to  an   increase  in  the  rainfall  season. 19   Besides  destroying   crops,  the  increase  in  rainfall  can  cause  waterborne   diseases  that  can  rapidly  spread  among  local  com- munities. 12   Ongoing  country  famine  spikes  from  year   to  year,  while  over  six  million  people  live  with  daily   food  insecurity  and  1.1  million  children  under  the   age of five are suffering from severe malnutrition. 20,21   Annual  flooding  starts  in  April  in  South  Sudan  and   renders  over  60  percent  of  the  country’s  inadequate   roadways impassable. 22,23  In fall of 2017, 3,200 pit-dug  latrines  were  flooded  lowering  sanitation  levels  and   contributing to cholera outbreaks. 13  This type of flood- related contamination leaves many with no choice but  to  continue  using  the  same  contaminated  water  for   bathing,  drinking,  and  cooking. 24   Access  to  essential   services,  like  healthcare,  is  nonexistent  across  much   of the country where the ruling government chooses to  spend  64  percent  of  its  national  budget  on  weaponiz- ing  its  military  while  allocating  only  3  percent  of  the   same  budget  to  health  care.  The  result  is  1.5  doctors   and two nurses for every 100,000 people. 25 South  Sudan  relies  heavily  on  agriculture  as  the   primary  source  of  revenue.  The  overall  poverty  rate   is  high  despite  large  deposits  of  oil  reserves,  which   account  for  98  percent  of  the  total  gross  domestic   product  (GDP). 12   The  industry  and  socio-economic   system are severely underdeveloped, while goods and  services  mostly  come  from  neighboring  countries,   especially  Sudan. 12   With  reference  to  the  study  area   map  (Figure  1),  85  percent  of  the  population  does   nonwage  work,  eg,  subsistence  agriculture,  and  only   1 percent has access to electricity. 22  These conditions  can  produce  immediate  and  severe  food  security   needs along with many compounded threats like gen- der-based  violence  (GBV).  “During  emergencies  such   as  conflicts  or  natural  disasters,  the  risk  of  violence,   exploitation, and abuse is heightened, particularly for  women and girls.” 26 In  the  United  States,  local  community  leaders   and decision-makers play a critical role in mitigating  risk  from  hazards  by  integrating  hazard  mitigation   in  their  local  disaster  management  plans. 28-30   Local   leaders  can  set  priorities,  provide  policy  outreach,   and  invite  stakeholders  to  work  together  to  discuss   community  safety  and  resilience  while  effectively   communicating  mitigation  methodologies  to  large   groups  of  local  actors. 18   Conversely,  South  Sudan’s   local  leaders  lack  the  critical  knowledge  and  ability   to  mitigate  significant  disaster  outcomes  due  to  an   ill-managed governmental system, corruption, tribal- ism,  and  resource  mismanagement. 31   This  govern- ment  system  relies  on  assistance  from  international   organizations,  eg,  United  Nations,  US  Agency  for   International  Development  (USAID),  and  others,  to   mitigate  disaster  risk  and  subsidize  basic  needs. 32,33   Within  this  context,  the  purpose  of  this  study  is   to  explore  and  then  recommend  accessible,  locally   empowered,  and  implementable  flood  risk  reduction   strategies for South Sudan. LITERATURE REVIEW Flooding hazard in South Sudan The  floods  in  South  Sudan  have  become  a  recur - rent  disaster  theme,  affecting  individuals,  families,   and communities each rainy season for many decades  in the past. 34  In July 2019, severe flooding devastated  many counties and villages across the nation, causing  more  than  908,000  persons  experiencing  homeless- ness  (PEH)  and  forcing  the  government  to  declare  a   SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   124 26/07/22   2:15 PM

125 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue state of emergency. The United Nations reported more  than  620,000  people  as  needing  immediate,  critical   life-saving  stocks  and  humanitarian  assistance. 35   Thirty  counties  in  different  states  throughout  the   country  were  inundated  by  heavy  rainfall  and  flood- ing,  from  Warrap,  Northern  Bhar  el-Gazal,  Lake,   Upper  Nile,  Jonglei,  Unity  to  Central  and  Eastern   Equatoria  states.  The  disaster  triggered  a  shortage   in  essential  services,  food,  medicine,  and  drinking   water for impacted individuals, families, and commu- nities in those 30 counties and beyond. 27  The United  Nations  humanitarian  assistance  team  in  South   Sudan  reported  that  it  needed  an  estimated  $61.5   million to provide immediate needs to support vulner - able  communities  and  continue  disaster  operations,   response, and recovery. 36 South  Sudan  has  a  history  of  flooding,   but  localised  floods  have  become  more   frequent.  Over  700,000  were  affected  by   severe flooding in the Jonglei and Eastern  Nile  states  in  2020.  The  floods  destroyed   crops  and  displaced  almost  85,000  peo- ple  in  Jonglei,  in  what  the  World  Food   Programme (WFP) described as the worst  flooding in 60 years. 34 Figure 1.   Study area with food security overlay (Source: ACAPS 27 ). SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   125 26/07/22   2:15 PM

126 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue The United Nations classified all these counties as  a  high  priority  for  humanitarian  assistance  needs. 37   In September 2020, for example, river overflow caused  by  heavy  rain  flooded  communities  along  the  White   Nile,  which  runs  in  the  middle  of  the  country.  This   disaster  has  severely  impacted  several  areas,  includ- ing  the  Lake  Jonglei  States.  Many  people  fled  their   homes  to  higher  ground  and  could  not  return  home.   Simultaneously,  conflict  displaced  more  than  33,000   people  in  this  one  area  alone. 23   Many  flood  analysts   view these flooding events as the worst ever to occur in  South  Sudan  history. 23,34   The  increase  in  rain  in  July   2020  caused  increased  flooding  that  destroyed  farms,   washed  roads  away,  led  to  greater  food  insecurity,   and  waterborne  disease.  This  situation  has  made  the   recovery process difficult for hundreds of thousands of  people during the period of civil war that put the entire  country  on  the  brink  of  collapse  and  ultimately  pro- duced  failed  state. 38   The  floods  have  devastated  com- munities,  displaced  families,  destroyed  homes,  farms,   and crops, and created damages to the environment. 38   Flooding  is  also  a  driver  of  systemic  malnutrition  in   South  Sudan. 39   A  climate  pattern  of  less  early  rains   results  in  crop  plants  that  are  small  and  physically   vulnerable  when  flooding  begins.  “These  conditions   prevent people from being able to feed themselves and  from building up financial assets.” 39  The seasonal, but  intensifying,  cycle  of  flooding  impacts  other,  critical   “survival sectors” in the South Sudan economy, like the  raising  of  livestock.  “Insecurity  has  brought  livestock   marketing to a standstill and—the result of poor roads,  conflict, and flooding—livestock market integration in  South Sudan remains a distant vision.” 40 Flood  risk  conceptualization  assesses  exposure,   hazard  vulnerability,  and  consequences  and  reveals   that  South  Sudan  is  at  high  risk  from  flooding.  This   calls for immediate and drastic mitigation strategies  for managing seasonal flooding. 41  In 2019, the number  of people affected by flooding was estimated between  600,000 and 800,000 people in more than seven coun- ties across South Sudan. 40  Table 1 shows the types of  climate  change-related  disasters  and  severity  levels   faced by many areas in South Sudan. In  Figure  2,  the  flood  modeling  and  analysis   of  river  flooding  in  South  Sudan  classified  Jonglei,   Unity, Upper Nile, Northern Bahr El Ghazal, Warab,  Central  Equatoria,  and  El  Buheyrat  at  high  threat   levels  (red)  of  river  flooding.  The  flood  modeling  for   the  states  of  Western  and  Eastern  Equatoria  (dark   orange)  indicates  medium  threat  levels. 41  These sce- narios required robust project planning decisions and  mitigation  strategies  to  prevent  the  consequences  or   impacts of river flood hazards in the classified areas.  Therefore,  a  viable  solution  for  reducing  community   risks associated with river flooding is the implemen- tation of structural mitigation projects. 41 Table 1. Natural hazards by severity level in  South Sudan (Source: Thinkhazard 42 ) Disaster type Severity level Urban flood High River flood High Wildfire High Water scarcity High Earthquake Medium Volcano Low Cyclone Very low Coastal flood No data Figure  2.    River  flood  vulnerability  for  South  Sudan   (Source: Thinkhazard 42 ). SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   126 26/07/22   2:15 PM

127 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue Famine, climate change adaptation, and early warning The  World  Bank  confirms  that  South  Sudan  is   vulnerable to several natural hazards, such as drought,  floods,   and   climate   change   variability. 12    Recent    increases  in  flooding  were  due  to  heavy  rainfall,  and   the overflow of water from the Indian Ocean and Lake  Victoria—all of which was exacerbated by variabilities  in climate change. 43  However, there is limited research  on  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  migration 12,44   or  the  correlation  to  areas  experiencing  conflict. 45   Nevertheless, the United Nations World Food Program  USA  has  indicated  that  climate  change  was  already   impacting  South  Sudanese  communities,  reporting   that  the  number  of  people  facing  famine  in  South   Sudan  and  hunger  was  on  the  rise,  prompting  the   agency to declare a famine in early 2017. This increase  in hunger is due to flooding, drought, and local conflict,  impacting  an  estimated  five  million  people  who  face   food  insecurity. 46   “Extreme  food  insecurity  persists   across  South  Sudan  as  the  lean  season  progresses,   conflict  continues  to  disrupt  normal  livelihoods,  and   macroeconomic conditions remain very poor.” 47 Nongovernmental  organizations  (NGOs),  like  the   Agency  for  Technical  Cooperation  and  Development   (ACTED), are attempting to mitigate the current food  shortages  for  more  than  4.8  million  Sudanese  people   via  improved  flood  resiliency. 48   “Engaging  in  specific   “adaptation  projects”  in  the  most  vulnerable  areas   with  stakeholders  already  active  in  adaptation,  such   as  community-based  organizations,  NGO’s  and  local   communities  as  called  for  by  local  leaders,  could  be   an effective measure to address the problems of flood- ing.” 49  In 2020, USAID predicted that climate change- related disasters, flooding, and drought in South Sudan  were  likely  to  affect  populations  in  the  western  areas   of  Jonglei  state  and  Pibor  county. 50   The  USAID  mis- sion  report  also  indicated  that  an  estimated  8.3  mil- lion  people  (about  70  percent  of  the  population)  will   need  humanitarian  aid  assistance  in  2021  due  to  the   increase  in  floods,  famine,  and  food  insecurity. 51   This   prediction reflects an increase in an estimated 800,000  people from the previous fiscal year. In conjunction with locally driven climate adapta- tion efforts, improving the hydro-meteorological moni- toring  network  to  create  an  effective  and  accessible   early  warning  system  (EWS)  in  South  Sudan  is  a   vital  objective  of  this  country’s  National  Adaptation   Program  of  Actions  to  Climate  (NAPA).  “Without  a   functional  and  efficient  early  warning  system,  com- munities  are  unprepared  and  therefore  highly  vul- nerable  to  floods  and  droughts.” 19   Indeed,  for  areas   with limited resources, EWS are one of the most cost- effective first steps toward resiliency and adaptation,  returning  more  than  four  dollars  in  avoided  losses   for  every  dollar  invested. 52   Farmers  in  these  regions   see  the  lack  of  access  to  information  about  climate   change  and  adaptation  technologies  as  one  of  their   most  significant  barriers  to  improved  resiliency. 53   “A  focus  that  neglects  to  enhance  capacity-building   and resilience as a prerequisite for managing climate  change risks will, in all likelihood, do little to reduce  vulnerability  to  those  risks.” 54   Development  of  local   EWS capabilities requires regional coordination with,  for  example,  the  Southern  African  Regional  Climate   Outlook  Forecast  (SARCOF)  that  monitors  current   regional  hydrological  conditions,  weather  patterns,   while  also  defining  current  flood  risk  levels  for  resi- dents. 55   “[In  South  Sudan]  Early  Warning  Systems   (EWS) are a key tool that can be utilized to reduce the  damage that results from a flood event.” 41 Role of international agencies The current flooding in South Sudan is a recurring  humanitarian  crisis,  claiming  many  lives,  destroying   properties,  farms,  livestock,  and  damaging  the  envi- ronment.  The  United  Nations,  USAID,  and  other   international  organizations  operating  in  the  country   play  an  enormous  role  in  emergency  support  to  the   local  population,  providing  immediate  emergency   supplies. 34   International  organizations  working  in   the  country  have  also  provided  technical  expertise,   funding,  and  advice  for  the  government  to  engage  in   disaster  planning,  preparedness,  response,  mitiga- tion,  and  recovery. 44   As  of  October  2018,  there  were   approximately 78 international organizations deliver - ing humanitarian service (11 from the United Nations  and  67  from  other  international  NGOs)  along  with   105  local  NGOs  in  the  country,  minimizing  human   suffering and saving lives while providing temporary  assistance  and  shelter  to  all  affected. 34   The  United   SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   127 26/07/22   2:15 PM

128 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue Nation’s  mission  in  South  Sudan  reported  in  2018   that they needed $1.5 billion for the entire operation. 34 The  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and   Cultural    Organization    (UNESCO)    International     Hydrological  Program  (IHP)  has  invested  heavily  in   investigating hydrological extremes and climate change  in  South  Sudan.  UNESCO  and  other  international   organizations  have  implemented  many  projects,  such   as  floodplain  management  and  risk  management  pro- grams. 56  UNESCO has reputable experience and exper - tise in floodplain management in countries like Pakistan,  Benin, Namibia, and other countries, and it has tried to  replicate  this  in  South  Sudan. 55   International  banks   committed  to  sustainable  development  and  fair-trade   practices  can  also  play  a  key  role  in  increasing  flood   resiliency  in  the  mitigation  phase  through  investment   and  helping  to  move  away  from  subsistence  living. 57   Next,  the  United  Nations  International  Strategy  for   Disaster  Reduction  (UNISDR)  and  United  Nations   Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs   (UNOCHA)  see  their  guiding  role  on  policy  guidelines   supporting  a  decentralized  flood  and  drought  man- agement  effort  on  the  ground  that  strengthens  local   communities  in  the  process. 54   Meanwhile,  the  United   Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change   (UNFCCC)  helps  lower  income  countries  mainstream   disaster  risk  reduction  (DRR)  efforts  with  climate   change  adaptation  resulting  in  national  adaptation   plans, eg, NAPA, 2015, and program priorities like flood  mitigation. 58  The assistance provided by these interna- tional  organizations  is  intended  for  immediate  emer - gency  support  and  not  to  replace  the  whole  country’s   infrastructure  system.  Additionally,  the  international   organization’s  aid  to  assist  the  country  has  provided   relief to millions of the residents. The South Sudanese  government’s  efforts  have  not  kept  up  with  the  crisis   and  international  response.  The  Department  of  State   attributes this to massive corruption, ill-equipped gov- ernment  institutions,  lack  of  expertise,  tribalism,  and   weak government institutions. 59 Bangladesh comparative case study Bangladesh  is  located  in  South  Asia,  shares  bor - ders  with  Myanmar  and  India,  and  has  a  land  area   of  about  147,570  km 2 .  The  predominantly  low-lying   deltaic  land  was  formed  by  the  Brahmaputra,  the   Ganges,  and  the  Meghna  rivers,  and  more  than  310   rivers  and  tributaries. 60   These  waterways  also  make   the  country  more  vulnerable  to  several  natural  dis- asters, such as cyclones, heavy rainfall, storm surges,  riverbank  erosion,  earthquakes,  drought,  tsunami,   fires,  and  salinity  intrusion.  Climate  change-related   flooding, in particular, impacts the agriculture indus- try  in  Bangladesh. 61   Similar  to  South  Sudan,  flood- ing  from  heavy  rainfall  and  frequent  flooding  occurs   in  Bangladesh  from  as  early  as  May  in  some  areas   through at least September leading to loss of human  lives,  property  destruction,  and  environmental  dam- age. 59,62   “Bangladesh  is  widely  recognized  as  one  of   the most vulnerable countries in the world to extreme  climatic events.” 63 In 2017 alone, flooding forced nine million people  into  homelessness,  and  an  estimated  1,000  people   lost  their  lives  due  to  drowning  and  waterborne  ill- ness. 14   Bangladesh  faced  several  disasters,  such  as   heavy monsoon rains, cyclone floods in coastal areas,  melting waters from the Himalayas, heavy deforesta- tion,  expansion  of  urbanization,  and  low-lying  land   loss.  Bangladesh  is  a  low-income  country  with  low   GDP 64   and  limited  resources  for  flood  management   and  mitigation. 65   The  majority  of  Bangladesh  people   cannot afford to pay for flood insurance, making them  more  vulnerable  to  flood  risks  including  loss  of  life   and  property  damage. 66   While  the  greatest  barrier   that  remains  to  the  resiliency  of  Bangladesh  today   is  ongoing  and  systemic  poverty,  one  of  the  greatest   assets  is  the  changing  approach  of  NGOs  who  are   beginning  to  embrace  disaster  risk  reduction  (DRR)   principles found in the Sendai Framework and other  international  guiding  DRR  documents. 64  “Experience  from  the  massive  floods  in  1987  and  1988,  and  the   cyclone  of  1991  has  definitely  contributed  to  better   tackling of natural disasters today.” 61 The   government’s   short-term   response   efforts    include  delivering  food,  water,  rescue,  shelter,  free  seed   for  farmers,  and  other  immediate  aid  items. 65   Other   long-term  response  efforts  are  building  embankments,   building  raised  flood  shelters,  flood  warning  systems,   emergency  planning,  dams,  and  reducing  deforesta- tion.  These  long-term  measures  are  not  consistently   SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   128 26/07/22   2:15 PM

129 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue maintained  because  they  are  expensive  to  manage,   and  many  people  see  no  immediate  benefits.  However,   after  being  devastated  by  several  disasters,  the  coun- try  decided  to  shift  its  response  efforts  from  reactive   to  a  more  proactive  disaster  preparedness  model.  The   National  Policy  on  Disaster  Management  details  “a   strategy of preparedness and preventive measures, such  as,  hazard  and  risk  analysis,  land  use  zoning,  building   codes  and  disaster  preparedness  training;  optimum   coordination  of  government  and  NGO  efforts;  and   inclusion  of  nonstructural  measures  such  as  commu- nity  disaster  preparedness,  training  and  public  aware- ness.” 65   In  Bangladesh,  improvements  to  roads  and   EWS  complement  evacuation  procedures,  and  earthen   embankments provide a buffer to mitigate storm flood- ing—but one of the greatest assets is an increase in local  disaster  planning. 67   Bangladesh  is  facing  a  real  threat   from several disasters, just like South Sudan and many  countries  worldwide  that  are  bearing  the  impacts  of   climate change. Bangladesh  made  progress  in  poverty  reduction   by  stimulating  the  economy  thereby  reducing  the   number  of  people  living  under  $1.90  per  day  from   44.2 percent to 14.8 percent between 1991 and 2016. 68   “Post-independence, Bangladesh has been defined by  the significant rise in the number of NGOs that have  emerged  to  help  the  formerly  war  plagued  nation   on  its  way  to  achieving  milestones  in  economic  and   infrastructure  growth.” 64   Some  initiatives  include   building  240  cyclone  shelters,  repairing  387  km  of   flood  embankments,  constructing  17,500  hectares  of   block plantation, building strip plantations in climate  change  vulnerable  areas,  and  installing  501  solar   irrigation  pumps. 67   “The  earthen  embankments  are   built  to  protect  the  coastal  communities  from  storm   surge and tidal/coastal flooding.” 66  Bangladesh’s gov- ernment  also  provided  basic  adaptation  kits,  health,   water,  agricultural  goods,  and  housing  to  more  than   40,000 people residing in saline and floodplain areas.  Disaster  education  and  alternative  livelihoods  sup- port training provided to more than 6,000 households  in 200 communities across the country. 64,67 The World Bank and the International Development  Agency have financed an estimated $1.5 billion for pro- jects  to  reduce  disaster  vulnerability  opposite  climate   change impacts. 67  These projects aimed to build coping  methods,  eg,  building  schools  used  as  shelters,  against   cyclones  and  flooding  as  in  the  recent  disaster  storms   that  saw  a  notable  reduction  in  deaths.  “Bangladesh   has been a frontrunner in adaptation and disaster pre- paredness.” 67   Additionally,  for  more  than  40  years,  the   United Nations and its partners have invested heavily  in  DRR  programs  within  Bangladesh,  helping  reduce   disaster  risks  and  save  lives,  properties,  and  the  envi- ronment from damages. 62  Forty years ago, cyclones and  flooding resulted in half a million casualties whereas in  2009 the powerful Cyclone Aila claimed a few hundred  lives. 69   The  presence  of  strong  leadership  sustained   international support, and the implementation of struc- tural,  eg,  EWS,  embankments,  and  nonstructural,  eg,   community  preparedness,  projects  have  resulted  in   Bangladesh  having  a  much  improved  national-level   preparedness system for DRR. 68 METHODOLOGY This research examines the context surrounding the  government  in  South  Sudan’s  inability  to  mitigate  the   recurring  hazard  of  flooding  thereby  saving  lives,  pre- venting  property  damage,  and  protecting  the  environ- ment.  Given  the  distressed  economic  history  of  South   Sudan, ongoing conflict, and lack of resources, this study  is developed around two main queries including: n n Why does the recurring flooding in South  Sudan  overwhelm  the  government’s  abil- ity   to   deploy   mitigation   strategies   to    reduce flood risk and hazards? n n What DRR strategies can the local, state, and  federal  governments  in  South  Sudan  rea- sonably deploy to begin to mitigate increas- ing flood risks, save lives,   prevent the loss of  property, and protect the   environment? A  focused  review  of  the  related  literature  was   selected  as  the  methodology.  This  type  of  qualita- tive  approach  is  common  as  it  supports  the  mul- tidisciplinary  nature  of  emergency  management. 70   Nonquantifiable data are often used in this way to add  depth  and  understanding  through  legitimate  sources   SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   129 26/07/22   2:15 PM

130 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue of  research. 71   It  is  also  common  to  employ  a  short,   more precise focused literature review to establish, for  example,  a  novel  concept,  a  policy  recommendation,   or to encourage additional research. 72,73  Initially, key- word  searches  included  “South  Sudan”  +  “emergency   management”  +  “flooding  hazard”  with  secondary   terms  that  included  “risk  reduction”  or  “conflict”  or   “humanitarian aid” in varied Boolean arrangements. Databases  accessed  through  a  university  library   included Emerald, ProQuest Central, EBSCOHost, and  JStor.  Google  Scholar  was  used  to  find  more  related   works  and  to  double-check  the  other  databases,  while   also  exploring  the  core  articles, 48   and  where  they  had   been referenced to potentially add more quality citations.  The focused review began by reading approximately 71  abstracts and conclusions of potentially related articles.  Existing  research  was  deemed  even  “slightly  relevant”   or  “likely  relevant”  was  read  completely  for  further   assessment.  Next,  12  core,  peer-reviewed  articles  were   retained  for  being  significantly  relevant  to  this  topic.   From  this  point,  the  citation  list  was  expanded  in  two   ways. First, by using the core articles” references to look  backward  in  time  for  additional  relevant  sources  and,   second,  by  looking  forward  at  articles  that  cited  those   core references. Aside from the peer-reviewed literature,  this  focused  review  methodology  included  data  from   international  organizations  operating  in  the  country,   news  reports,  and  from  government  and  nongovern- ment  organizations,  eg,  World  Bank,  United  Nations,   US Department of State, and local agencies operating in  South Sudan. For the purposes on continuity and study  presentation,  results  of  the  literature  review  extended   to  section  1.0.  Similarly,  the  comparative  case  study   of  Bangladesh  (2.4)  used  the  same  literature  review   method  while  only  substituting  the  key  word  “South   Sudan” for the key word “Bangladesh.” DISCUSSION This  study  conducted  a  focused  review  of  the   available  literature  and  a  comparable  case  study   review  of  flood  risk  reduction  efforts  in  Bangladesh.   Results  indicate  that  South  Sudan’s  government   has  limited  abilities,  expertise,  policies,  willingness,   and  resources  for  DRR  flood-related  projects.  When   flooding  occurs,  many  South  Sudanese  people  find   themselves reacting to immediate dangers due to the  lack  of  preparedness  and  access  to  EWS.  In  many   cases, this leads to panic, catastrophic outcomes, and  loss of lives due to the lack of proper disaster prepar - edness  information. 42   The  literature  also  confirms   that there needs to be more of a structural and non- structural commitment to flood mitigation (and DRR  in general). Finally, since South Sudan is a relatively  young  country  the  international  long-term  commit- ment  cannot  be  assessed  over  the  last  40  years,  for   example, like the case study in Bangladesh. However,  it is notable that South Sudan has 78 NGOs operating  in the country as of 2018 34  while Bangladesh has over  2,500 registered NGOs in the same year. 64 The  critical  infrastructure  for  managing  flood  risk   in  South  Sudan,  ie,  drainage  systems,  canals,  urban   planning, roads, bridges, dams, building codes, seawalls,  and  levees,  is  underdeveloped.  The  area  now  known   as  South  Sudan  has  been  in  economic  distress,  fight- ing  civil  wars,  and  experiencing  political  tension  from   1955-1972, 1983-2005, and 2013-2017. 27  This history of  instability has impeded the development of the types of  critical infrastructure that support DRR and meets the  UN mandate for sustainable development goals. 55  These  conditions  have  also  created  impediments  in  building   capabilities  and  providing  geospatial  analysis  to  help   decision-makers  at  the  local  and  national  government   levels. The use of geospatial analysis tools, like ArcGIS  Online, in the hands of local stakeholders have the poten- tial to judiciously allocate resources to the most vulner - able areas and this is an area ripe for further study in  South Sudan. The civil war and many other issues have  hindered  adaptations  to  climate  change  research  and   resiliency  for  South  Sudan  to  become  sustainable  and   build  disaster  risk  management  capabilities. 42   These   problems  lead  to  weaker  governmental  institutions,   political  systems,  mismanagement  of  resources,  and   delayed economic progress. 42  Additionally, South Sudan  educational  institutions  have  little  or  no  knowledge  of   flood  risk  reduction,  environmental  studies,  or  emer - gency management. 74 Structural approach to disaster risk reduction Structural  mitigation  efforts  largely  apply  to   physically  altering  the  built  environment  with,  for   SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   130 26/07/22   2:15 PM

131 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue example,   dams,   levees,   canals,   embankments,   or    improved  drainage  systems  to  reduce  the  potential   loss  of  life  and  property  damage  when  water  levels   rise. 75   The  scale  of  the  project  directly  relates  to  a   country’s economic resources. 76  In New Orleans, USA,  the  Seabrook  floodgate  complex  addressed  flood  risk   with a single, permanent $14.5 billion structural flood  mitigation  project. 77   The  Seabrook  barrier  works  in   conjunction  with  other  existing  barriers  to  reduce   storm surge risk to areas, like the Lower Ninth Ward,  that  were  hard  hit  by  Hurricane  Katrina  in  2005. 78   Referencing  the  case  study  area  from  Bangladesh,   this  country  has  managed  to  assemble  large,  phased   structural  flood  mitigation  projects  starting  back  in   the  1960’s. 79   The  current  phase  has  USD  $2  billion   budget.  “The  Government  of  the  People’s  Republic   of  Bangladesh  is  paying  for  the  project—known  as   Coastal  Embankment  Improvement  Project,  Phase-1   (CEIP-1)—with funds borrowed from the World Bank  and  grant  monies  issued  by  the  bank  under  its  pilot   program  for  climate  resilience.” 77   While  these  types   of  projects  may  not  be  immediately  available  in  the   young  country  of  South  Sudan,  smaller  scale,  locally   driven  structural  measures  can  and  must  be  imme- diately  considered.  Flood  mitigation  products  that   require more labor, but less direct cost, ie, equipment,  specialized tools, and technology, are part of the solu- tion.  Two  examples  of  this  smaller  scale  approach   to  structural  mitigation  for  DRR  can  include  the   Trapbag system and Gabion wall systems. Trapbag  systems.   TrapBag  is  a  multipurpose  system   used  for  flood  protection,  mudslides,  river  stabili- zation,  stormwater  containment,  dams,  dikes,  lev- ees,  seawalls  and  has  a  life  span  of  5  years  from   the  moment  of  installation. 80   The  TrapBag  system   (Figure  3),  which  is  cost-effective,  easy  to  ship,  and   store,  protects  the  entire  wall  from  being  compro- mised  if  one  bag  fails  as  the  next  one  will  remain   strong, keeping the whole barrier working in the same  capacity and providing flood protection. 78  This system  has been used successfully in several US states   expe- riencing the effects of climate change like Illinois and  Florida. 82,83   Referencing  Figure  4,  several  planeloads   of  these  bags  were  quickly  flown  to  Argentina  for   water  containment  in  response  to  the  2011  Valadero   Gold  Mine  cyanide  spill, 84,85   which  illustrates  the   potential of this product to be utilized internationally  with  minimal  notice.  One  key  aspect  of  this  system   that  makes  it  suitable  for  South  Sudan  is  that  it   does  not  require  trained  expertise  or  specific  equip- ment  to  install.  This  is  the  type  of  local     adaptation   project that could have an immediate impact on local     communities. 48 Gabion  wall  systems.   Gabion  walls  are  wire  mesh   boxes  that  are  tied  together  and  filled  up  with  local   rocks.  This  system  is  less  expensive  than  a  concrete   wall 86   and  can  transition  into  a  more  permanent   solution  than  the  less  expensive  TrapBag  approach.   Gabion  walls  have  the  advantage  of  using  local   materials  and  resist  water  erosion  since  they  freely   Figure 3.   Trapbag example (Source: Sulzberger 81 ). Figure    4.     Veladero    Mine    water    contamination     TrapBag response (Source: Jamasmie 84 ). SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   131 26/07/22   2:15 PM

132 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue drain.  However,  they  are  essentially  gravity  struc- tures  that  are  subject  to  the  lateral  force  of  water. 87   Including some engineering principles like interlock- ing  the  cages  instead  of  stacking  them  can  produce   longer term, more effective results. 85  One such project  in  Kabul,  Afghanistan  (Figure  5)  protected  several   villages  and  valuable  agricultural  land  from  flood- ing.  “Under  the  supervision  of  HAP  [Humanitarian   Assistance Program] engineering experts from Kabul,  walls  were  built  on  both  sides  of  the  river  to  both   block  and  channel  floodwater.  Local  laborers  from   Kochi  Khail  were  employed  during  the  construction   process, helping to benefit the local economy.” 88  Cesvi,  an  Italian  humanitarian  NGO,  has  also  successfully   used  gabion  systems  for  flood  relief  in  Somalia.  A   Cesvi employee, working to protect over 600 families  from  rising  river  water,  explains  that  “the  gabion   walls have a stronger resistance to currents, are flex- ible and adaptable to any changes in the terrain. The  simple  techniques  based  on  stones  locally  available   make  the  gabion  walls  more  economically  affordable   for the communities.” 89 Another, local flood mitigation project (down to a  house-by-house level) employed the gabion wall meth- odology in Nairobi. 90  “Localised river remediation and  adaptation projects have been carried out at the small  scale  by  governmental  and  nongovernmental  parties   in  Nairobi.” 88   However,  the  degree  of  expertise,  eg,   engineering  support  and  oversight,  is  proportional   to  the  efficacy  of  these  walls.  The  gabion  wall  shown   from  the  project  in  Nairobi  (Figure  6)  will  likely  not   outlast the engineered product from Kabul shown in  Figure 5, and this may provide insight into why these  walls have yielded varying results. 91  In South Sudan,  there is a component of urgency where the value of a  locally derived effort similar to that shown in Figure 6  would have value as a starting point to flood vulner - ability reduction. Nonstructural approaches to disaster risk reduction Nonstructural approaches to DRR are less physi- cally  obvious  than  structural  ones  and  relates  to   what  people  within  a  community  can  offer  person- ally  and  what  personal  adoption  barriers  exist. 92,93   Nonstructural  flood  mitigation  measures  are  consid- ered  sustainable  and  universally  accepted  as  being   effective. 94   Some  examples  are  policies,  laws,  and   public  education,  preparation  and  evacuation  train- ing,  early  flood  warning  systems,  and  forecasting.   Enforcement of laws that govern building codes, land  use mapping, zoning, and urban planning bring bene- fits in reducing disaster risk hazards. 95  Working with  local  community  organizations  to  disseminate  DRR   training  and  education  is  widely  accepted  as  one  of   Figure   5.    Gabion   wall   example   from   Afghanistan    (Source: IOM 88 ). Figure 6.   Local village gabion wall in Nairobi (Source:  Mulligan et al. 90 ). SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   132 26/07/22   2:15 PM

133 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue the  best  means  to  raise  resiliency.  “Emergency  plan- ners can better perform their mission if they develop  and maintain effective relationships with community-  and faith-based organizations in their jurisdictions.” 26   This is also true in Bangladesh, where personal resil- iency  is  part  of  the  social  fabric.  “But  risk  reduction   initiatives  don’t  necessarily  have  to  involve  large- scale construction efforts. Red Crescent volunteers in  and  around  Satiantoli  [India]  also  promote  the  use   of  traditional  disaster  risk  reduction  related  meas- ures,  which  have  been  passed  down  from  generation   to  generation,  such  as  the  preparation  and  storage   of  clay  stoves,  the  construction  of  masas,  or  raised   platforms,  and  the  storage  of  seeds,  dry  fruit,  and   grain.” 96   In  fact,  several  studies  have  demonstrated   the  effectiveness  of  nonstructural  flood  mitigation   approaches in the case study area of Bangladesh. 97,98   In a lower income setting, like South Sudan, maximiz- ing low-cost, nonstructural mitigation programs may  be one of the most accessible means to promote locally  empowered DRR. RECOMMENDATIONS Based on the findings of this study and the subse- quent discussion, five recommendations were derived  as  a  starting  point  to  developing  meaningful,  practi- cal,  and  actionable  flood  risk  reduction  strategies  in   South Sudan including: 1.  Establish  a  flood  mitigation  strategy   that  brings  together  local,  state,  national,   and  international  organizations  to  work   together  under  one  national  policy.  This   includes   building   partnerships   among    profit  and  non-profit,  community-based,   and faith-based organizations. 2.  Develop  local  DRR  through  non-struc- tural   emergency   management   training    and  education  programs.  This  includes   strengthening  educational  institutions  to   develop a curriculum for teaching natural  disaster  awareness,  flood  risk  reduction,   disaster planning, preparedness, response,  mitigation, and recovery. 3.  Develop  and  enhance  regionally  sup- ported  and  locally  accessible  EWS  capa- bilities  as  part  of  non-structural  flood   mitigation  measures  and  connect  this  to   local emergency evacuation training. 4.  Implement  structural  flood  mitigation   strategies using simple but accessible meth- ods like the Trapbag or Gabion wall systems. 5.  Procure  funding  through  international   resources like the World Bank to invest in  building nationwide critical infrastructure  that  includes  urban  planning,  land  use,   hospitals,  roads,  building  codes,  bridges,   floodwalls, levees, flood barriers, and dams. CONCLUSION The  ongoing  conflict,  safety  concerns,  and  travel   insecurity  prohibited  interviewing  or  gathering  other   empirical data for this study which may have led to, for  example,  determining  the  viability  of  a  low-elevation   property buyout program as another means of sustain- able  flood  mitigation  in  South  Sudan.  However,  this   study  has  produced  five  actionable  and  practical  rec- ommendations as a meaningful starting point for ongo- ing flood mitigation efforts for this country that is just  beginning only its second decade in existence. Opposite  the  forces  of  climate  change,  flooding  in  South  Sudan   will  be  worse  in  the  next  decade.  Therefore,  a  focused   effort  to  use  structural  and  nonstructural  means  to   mitigate  this  ongoing  threat  to  begin  to  improve  local   resilience  by  moving  the  people  of  South  Sudan  away   from subsistence living and toward economic resilience  is  essential.  Additionally,  predicting  flooding  events   requires adequate resources and technological innova- tion  which  is  lacking  in  countries  like  South  Sudan.   The Bangladesh case study and disaster risk reduction  programs represent a potential path forward for South  Sudan for building their disaster risk reduction strate- gies.  South  Sudan  has  more  natural  resources  than   Bangladesh 99   but  having  unified  voices  among  gov- ernment  officials  to  tackle  corruption  issues  can  help   prevent  resource  mismanagement,  allow  the  country   to invest in sustainable DRR programs, and save lives. SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   133 26/07/22   2:15 PM

134 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue ACkNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to acknowledge and thank the School of  Continuing Studies Emergency and Disaster Management Master’s  Program at Georgetown University for its support of this study. John  V.  Mayen,  MS,  Emergency  &  Disaster  Management,  Military   Intelligence, Emergency and Disaster Management, Master’s Program,  School of Continuing Studies, Georgetown University, Washington, DC. Erik  Wood,  MS,  Adjunct  Faculty  (Ethics,  Research,  GIS),  Emergency   and  Disaster  Management,  Master’s  Program,  School  of  Continuing   Studies,  Georgetown  University,  Washington,  DC.  ORCID:  https:// orcid.org/0000-0003-0531-6314. Tim Frazier, PhD, Professor of the Practice and Faculty Director, School  of  Continuing  Studies  (SCS),  Emergency  and  Disaster  Management,   Master’s Program, School of Continuing Studies, Georgetown University,  Washington, DC. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1270-5078. REFERENCES 1. Aerts JC: A review of cost estimates for flood adaptation.  Water .  2018; 10(11): 1646. 2. Doocy S, Daniels A, Murray S, et al.: The human impact of floods:  A  historical  review  of  events  1980-2009  and  systematic  literature   review.  PLoS Curr . 2013; 5. 3. Hallegatte S, Green C, Nicholls RJ, et al.: Future flood losses in  major coastal cities.  Nat Clim Change . 2013; 3(9): 802-806. 4. Winsemius HC, Jongman B, Veldkamp TIE, et al.: Disaster risk,  climate  change,  and  poverty:  Assessing  the  global  exposure  of   poor  people  to  floods  and  droughts.   Environ  Dev  Econ .  2018;  23:   328-348. 5. Marsooli R, Lin N, Emanuel K, et al.: Climate change exacerbates  hurricane flood hazards along US Atlantic and Gulf coasts in spa- tially varying patterns.  Nat Commun . 2019; 10(1): 1-9. 6. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP): How climate  change  is  making  record-breaking  floods  the  new  normal.  2020.   Available  at   https: // www.unep.org / news-and-stories / story / how-cli   mate-change-making-record-breaking-floods-new-normal .  Accessed   January 21, 2021. 7. Tierney K:  The Social Roots of Risk: Producing Disasters, Promoting  Resilience . Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2014. 8.  Hallegatte  S,  Vogt-Schilb  A,  Bangalore  M,  et  al.:   Unbreakable:  Building the Resilience of the Poor in the Face of Natural Disasters .  Washington, DC: World Bank Publications, 2016. 9.  Wood  EX,  Frazier  TG:  Disasters,  community  vulnerability,  and   poverty: The intersection between economics and emergency manage- ment.  J Emerg Manag . 2021; 19(3): 227-233. DOI 10.5055/jem.0563. 10.  Carter  NT:   Flood  Resilience  and  Risk  Reduction:  Federal   Assistance and Programs . Washington, DC: Congressional Research  Service, 2019. 11. International Federation of the Red Cross (IFRC): What is vul- nerability?  (n.d.).  Available  at   https: // www.ifrc.org / en / what-we-do / disaster-management / about-disasters / what-is-a-disaster / what-is- vulnerability /. 12.  World  Bank  Group:  South  Sudan.  Climate  change:  Knowledge   portal.  2021.  Available  at   www.climatechangeknowledgeportal. worldbank.org / country / south-sudan . Accessed February 16, 2021. 13.  ACAPS:  South  Sudan—Country  profile.  2018.  Available  at   https: // www.acaps.org / country / south-sudan / country-profile .  Accessed January 27, 2021. 14.  UNHCR:  Thirty-one  people  are  newly  displaced  every  minute   of  the  day:  Forced  displacement  in  2017.  UNHCR  Global  Trends.   2017.  Available  at  www. https: // www.unhcr.org / globaltrends2017 /.  Accessed April 17, 2021. 15.  Council  on  Foreign  Relations  (CFR):  The  civil  war  in  South   Sudan. Global Conflict Tracker. 2021. Available at  www.cfr.org / global- conflict-tracker / civil-war-South-Sudan . Accessed February 17, 2021. 16.  Albano  AT:  Determination  of  successful  secession  in  post-colo- nial Africa: The case of South Sudan.  Braz J Afr Stud . 2018; 3(6). 17.  Specia  M:  A  peace  deal  for  South  Sudan  is  signed.  Will  it   last?  New  York  Times.  2018.  Available  at   https: // www.nytimes. com / 2018 / 06 / 27 / world / africa / south-sudan-peace-deal.html .  Accessed March 2, 2021. 18. FEMA: Building community resilience with nature-based solu- tions.  A  Guide  for  Local  Communities.  2020.  Available  at   www. fema.gov . Accessed February 18, 2021. 19.  National  Adaptation  Programme  of  Actions  to  Climate  Change   (NAPA): Republic of South Sudan ministry of the environment. 2015.  Available  at   https: // unfccc.int / files / adaptation / workstreams / national_ adaptation_programmes_of_action / application / pdf / sout .    Accessed     January 21, 2021. 20.  United  Nations  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian   Affairs  (UNOCHA):  South  Sudan—2018  Humanitarian  Response   Plan.   2017.   Available   at    https: // reliefweb.int / sites / reliefweb.int / files / resources / SS_2018_HumanitarianResponsePlan.pdf .  Accessed   January 21, 2021. 21. United Nations (UN): South Sudan famine threat: UN food secu- rity agency in ‘race against time’. UN News. 2019. Available at  https: // news.un.org / en / story / 2019 / 12 / 1053321 . Accessed January 21, 2021. 22. Young H, Larsson N, Leach A, et al.: The crisis in South Sudan  can’t  be  solved  with  more  money.  We  need  peace.  The  Guardian.   2016.  Available  at   https: // www.theguardian.com / global-develop   ment-professionals-network / 2016 / mar / 24 / south-sudan-funding- humanitarian-crisis-famine-peace . Accessed January 21, 2021. 23.  World  Bank:  The  World  Bank  in  South  Sudan—Overview.   2018.  Available  at   http: // www.worldbank.org / en / country / southsu   dan / overview . Accessed January 21, 2021. 24.  Associated  Press  News  (AP):  ‘Our  children  die  in  our  hands’:   Floods  ravage  South  Sudan.  2021.  Available  at   www.apnews. com / article / climate-south-sudan-hunger-health-floods .   Accessed    February 25, 2021. 25. Patel RB, Wild HB: To do no harm: Humanitarian aid in conflict  demands  political  engagement.   Disaster  Med  Public  Health  Prep .  2018; 12: 567-568. 26.  United  Nations  Fund  for  Population  Activities  (UNFPA):   Minimum  standards  for  prevention  and  response  to  gender- based  violence  in  emergencies.  2015.  Available  at   www.unfpa.org .  Accessed February 11, 2021. 27. ACAPS: South Sudan—Floods. Briefing Notes. 2019. Available at  https: // www.acaps.org / sites / acaps / files / products / files / 20191104_acaps_ start_briefing_note_south_sudan_floods_0.pdf . 28.  Stajura  M,  Glik  D,  Eisenman  D,  et  al.:  Perspectives  of      community-and  faith-based  organizations  about  partnering  with   local  health  departments  for  disasters.   Int  J  Environ  Res  Public   Health . 2012; 9(7): 2293-2311. 29.  Patel  SS,  Rogers  MB,  Amlôt  R,  et  al.:  What  do  we  mean  by   ‘community resilience’? A systematic literature review of how it is  defined in the literature.  PLoS Curr . 2017; 9: 2-13, 72-82. 30.  FEMA:  Building  community  resilience  by  integrating  hazard   mitigation. The role of local leadership. 2020. Available at  fema.gov / multi-hazard-mitigation-planning . Accessed February 19, 2021. 31.  The  Enough  Project:  Threat  without  consequences  for  atrocities   and kleptocracy: The paper in South Sudan. 2016. Available at  https: // enoughproject.org / reports / paper-tiger-south-sudan-threats-without- consequences-atrocities-and-kleptocracy . Accessed April 17, 2021. SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   134 26/07/22   2:15 PM

135 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue 32. Yayboke E: Accessing South Sudan: Humanitarian aid in a time  of crisis. CSIS Briefs. 2018. Available at  https: // www.csis.org / analy  sis / accessing-south-sudan-humanitarian-aid-time-crisis .  Accessed   March 9, 2021. 33.  United  Nations  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian   Affairs (UNOCHA): South Sudan: UN CERF allocates $10 million  for flood response. 2020. Available at  https: // www.unocha.org / story / south-sudan-un-cerf-allocates-10-million-flood-response .  Accessed   February 22, 2021. 34. De Coning C, Tchie AEY, Grand AO, et al.: Climate, peace and  security  fact  sheet:  South  Sudan.  2021.  Available  at   https: // www. nupi.no / en / News / Climate-Peace-and-Security-Fact-Sheet-South- Sudan . Accessed January 21, 2021. 35.  United  Nations  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian   Affairs  (UNOCHA):  CERF  allocates  US$15  million  for  flooding   response  in  South  Sudan.  2019.  Available  at   https: // www.unocha. org / story / south-sudan-cerf-allocates-15-million-flooding-response .  Accessed February 16, 2021. 36.  United  Nations  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian   Affairs  (UNOCHA):  South  Sudan:  Flood’s  emergency  response   strategy  and  funding  requirements.  2019.  Available  at   https: // reliefweb.int / report / south-sudan / south-sudan-floods-pose-new- threats-children-and-families . Accessed February 13, 2021. 37.  U.N.  News:  Flooding  leaves  South  Sudan  facing  threat  of   ‘catastrophic’  hunger  levels:  Humanitarian  aid.  2020.  Available  at   https: // news.un.org /. Accessed February 17, 2021. 38.  United  Nations  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian   Affairs  (UNOCHA):  South  Sudan  floods  pose  new  threats  to  chil- dren  and  families.  2020.  Available  at   https: // reliefweb.int / report / south-sudan / south-sudan-floods-pose-new-threats-children-and- families.  Accessed February 15, 2020. 39.  O’Driscoll  D:  Drivers  of  malnutrition  in  South  Sudan.  K4D   Helpdesk  Report.  University  of  Manchester.  2018.  Available  at   https: // opendocs.ids.ac.uk / opendocs / bitstream / handle / 20.500.   12413 / 14224 / 466_Drivers_of_Malnutrition_in_South_Sudan. pdf?sequence=1 . Accessed March 2, 2021. 40. Cullis A: Understanding the livestock economy of South Sudan:  Field  study  findings.  Tana  Copenhagen  Aps.  2021.  Available   at  https: // tanacopenhagen.com / wp-content / uploads / 2021 / 04 / Field- Report.pdf . Accessed March 2, 2021. 41. World Food Program: Humanitarian response plan: South Sudan.  2019. Available at  www.unwfp.org . Accessed February 16, 2021. 42.  Thinkhazard:  Natural  hazards  identification  in  South  Sudan.   Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. 2020. Available  at  https: // thinkhazard.org / en / report / 74-South-Sudan .   Accessed    March 27, 2021. 43.  Tiitmamer  N:  South  Sudan’s  devastating  floods:  Why  there  is   a  need  for  urgent  resilience  measures.  The  Sudd  Institute.  2020.   Available   at    https: // www.suddinstitute.org / assets / Publications /  5fbcef5b321bd_SouthSudansDevastatingFloodsWhyThereIs_   Full.pdf . Accessed January 24, 2021. 44. Podesta J: The climate crisis, migration, and refugees. Brookings  Institute.  2019.  Available  at   https: // www.brookings.edu / research / the-climate-crisis-migration-and-refugees /.  Accessed  January  21,   2021. 45. USAID:  South Sudan Climate Vulnerability Profile: Sector-and  Location-Specific  Climate  Risks  and  Resilience  Recommendations .  Global   Environmental   Management   Support   Program.   2019.    Available at  www.usaid.gov . Accessed February 17, 2021. 46. World Food Program USA (WFP): The first climate change con- flict:  South  Sudan.  2017.  Available  at   https: // www.wfpusa.org / arti  cles / the-first-climate-change-conflict /. Accessed February 17, 2021. 47.  Famine  Early  Warning  System  Network  (FEWS  NET):  South   Sudan—Food  security  outlook  update.  2018.  Available  at   http: // fews.net / east-africa / south-sudan / food-security-outlook-update / april- 2018 . Accessed January 24, 2021. 48.  ACTED:   South  Sudan|  Uncategorized:  Climate  Resilience:   Better  Agricultural  Practices  for  Better  Incomes .  Paris:  ACTED   Global,  2020.  Available  at   https: // www.acted.org / en / climate-resil- ience-better-agricultural-practices-for-better-incomes .    Accessed     March 28, 2021. 49. Herslund LB, Jalayer F, Jean-Baptiste N, et al.: A multi-dimen- sional assessment of urban vulnerability to climate change in Sub- Saharan Africa.  Nat  Hazards .  2016;  82(2):  149-172.  DOI:  10.1007/ s11069-015-1856-x. 50.  USAID:  USG  South  Sudan  complex  emergency  fact  sheet  #2.   2021. Available at  www.usaid.gov . Accessed February 16, 2021. 51. USAID: USG response to complex emergency in South Sudan.  2021. Available at  www.usaid.gov . Accessed February 20, 2021. 52.  Hallegatte  S,  Fay  M,  Barbier  E,  et  al.:  Disaster  risk,  climate   change,  and  poverty:  Assessing  the  global  exposure  of  poor  peo- ple  to  floods  and  droughts.  2018;  23(3):  328-348.  DOI:  10.1017/ S1355770X17000444. 53.  Juana  JS,  Kahaka  Z,  Okurut  FN:  Farmers’  perceptions  and   adaptations  to  climate  change  in  Sub-Sahara  Africa:  A  synthesis   of  empirical  studies  and  implications  for  public  policy  in  African   agriculture.  J Agricult Sci . 2013; 5(4): 121. 54. O’Brien G, O’Keefe P, Rose J, et al.: Climate change and disaster  management.  Disasters.   2006;  30(1):  64-80.  DOI:  10.1111/j.1467- 9523.2006.00307.x. 55.  Muhonda  P,  Mabiza  C,  Makurira  H,  et  al.:  Analysis  of  institu- tional mechanisms that support community response to impacts of  floods  in  the  middle-Zambezi  river  basin,  Zimbabwe.   Phys  Chem   Earth Parts A / B / C . 2014; 76:64-71. 56.  United  Nations:  Sustainable  development  goals.  Disaster  risk   reduction.  2015.  Available  at  www. https: // sustainabledevelopment. un.org / topics / disasterriskreduction . Accessed March 12, 2021. 57.  Fikru  M:  Determinants  of  international  standards  in  Sub- Saharan  Africa:  The  role  of  institutional  pressure  from  differ - ent  stakeholders.   Ecol  Econ.   2016;  130:296-307.  DOI:  10.1016/j. ecolecon.2016.08.007. 58.  United  Nations  Climate  Change  (UNCC):  What  is  the  United   Nations framework convention on climate change? (n.d.). Available  at  https: // unfccc.int / process-and-meetings / the-convention / what- is-the-united-nations-framework-convention-on-climate-change .  Accessed January 21, 2021. 59.  US  Department  of  State:  The  sentry’s  report  on  corruption   in  South  Sudan.  2016.  Available  at   www.us.states.gov /.  Accessed   February 17, 2021. 60. United Nations:  Disaster Risk Reduction in Bangladesh Status  Reports  2020.  UN   Office  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction:  Asian   Disaster  Preparedness  Center.  2020.  Available  at   www.un.org .  Accessed March 30, 2021. 61.  Islam  MT,  Nursey-Bray  M:  Adaptation  to  climate  change   in  agriculture  in  Bangladesh:  The  role  of  formal  institutions.   J  Environ Manag . 2017; 200: 347-358. 62.  Matin  N,  Taher  M:  The  changing  emphasis  of  disasters  in   Bangladesh NGOs.  Disasters.  2001; 25(3): 227-239. 63. Islam R, Walkerden G: Social networks and challenges in gov- ernment  disaster  policies:  A  case  study  from  Bangladesh.   Int  J   Disaster Risk Reduct . 2017; 22: 325-334. 64.  Chowdhury  AMR,  Bhuiya  A,  Chowdhury  ME,  et  al.:  The   Bangladesh paradox: Exceptional health achievement despite eco- nomic poverty.  Lancet.  2013; 382(9906): 1734-1745. SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   135 26/07/22   2:15 PM

136 Journal of Emergency Management  Vol. 20, No. 8 Georgetown University Special Issue 65.  Seddiky  MA,  Giggins  H,  Gajendran  T:  International  prin- ciples  of  disaster  risk  reduction  informing  NGOs  strategies  for      community  based  DRR  mainstreaming:  The  Bangladesh  context.   Int J Disaster Risk Reduct.  2020; 48: 101580. 66. BBC News:  Rivers and Flooding. Case Study: Bangladesh . 2017.  Available at  bbc.co.uk . Accessed March 29, 2021. 67. Hossain MN, Paul SK: Vulnerability factors and effectiveness of  disaster mitigation measures in the Bangladesh Coast.  Earth Syst  Environ . 2018; 2(1): 55-65. 68.  World  Bank:  Bangladesh:  Reducing  poverty  and  sharing   prosperity.  2018.  Available  at   www.ttps: // www.worldbank.org / en / results / 2018 / 11 / 15 / bangladesh-reducing-poverty-and-sharing-pros   perity . Accessed March 30, 2021. 69.  Shaw  R,  Mallick  F,  Islam  A  (Eds.):   Disaster  Risk  Reduction   Approaches in Bangladesh . Vol. 103. New York, NY: Springer, 2013. 70.  Phillips  B:  Qualitative  methods  and  disaster  research.   Int  J   Mass Emerg Disasters . 1997; 15(1): 179-195. 71.  Dudovskiy  J:  Research  methodology:  Data  collection  methods.   2011.  Available  at   https: // research-methodology.net / research-meth- ods / data-collection /. Accessed February 11, 2021. 72. Alderman L, Towers S, Bannah S: Student feedback systems in  higher  education:  A  focused  literature  review  and  environmental   scan.  Qual High Educ . 2012; 18(3): 261-280. 73.  Walton  AL,  Rogers  B:  Workplace  hazards  faced  by  nursing   assistants  in  the  United  States:  A  focused  literature  review.   Int  J   Environ Res Public Health . 2017; 14(5): 544. 74.   Ranganathan   R,   Briceno-Garmendia   C:    South   Sudan’s    Infrastructure:  A  Continental  Perspective .  Washington,  DC:  World   Bank, 2011. 75. Alcoforado F: Flood control and its management. J  Atmos Earth  Sci.   2018,  1:  005.  DOI:  10.24966/AES-8780/100005.  Available  at   https: // www.heraldopenaccess.us / article_pdf / 15 / flood-control-and- its-management.pdf . Accessed January 21, 2021. 76. Bertilsson L, Wiklund K, de Moura Tebaldi I, et al.: Urban flood  resilience—A multi-criteria index to integrate flood resilience into  urban  planning.   J  Hydrol  (Amsterdam) .  2019;  573:  970-982.  DOI:   10.1016/j.jhydrol.2018.06.052. 77. Schwartz J: Vast defenses now shielding New Orleans. New York  Times.  2012.  Available  at   https: // www.nytimes.com / 2012 / 06 / 15 / us / vast-defenses-now-shielding-new-orleans.html .  Accessed  January   15, 2021. 78. US Army Corps of Engineers: Seabrook floodgate complex. 2013.  Available  at   https: // www.mvn.usace.army.mil / Portals / 56 / docs / PAO / FactSheets / SeabrookFloodgateComplex.pdf .  Accessed  January  15,   2021. 79.  Cardno  CA:  Massive  flood  protection  project  under  way  in   Bangladesh.  Civil  Engineering  Magazine .  American  Society  of   Civil  Engineers  (ASCE).  2015.  Available  at   https: // www.asce. org / magazine / 20150203-massive-flood-protection-project-under- way-in-bangladesh /. Accessed January 15, 2021. 80.  TrapBag:  Flood  protection.  2021.  Available  at  www. https: // trap  bag.com / flood-protection /. Accessed March 21, 2021. 81. Sulzberger AG: Shovel, strain, stack no more in high water. New  York Times. 2011. Available at  https: // www.nytimes.com / 2011 / 04 / 09 / us / 09flood.html . Accessed March 9, 2021. 82. Smith B: City set to OK $746K beach erosion control contract.  Evanston Now. 2020. Available at  https: // evanstonnow.com / city-set- to-ok-746k-beach-erosion-control-contract /.  Accessed  January  21,   2021. 83. Greene M: Work underway to fill sinkholes and stabilize parts  of the lakefront on the South side as first major storm of the sea- son  strikes.  Chicago  Tribune.  2021.  Available  at   https: // www.chica  gotribune.com / news / environment / ct-lake-michigan-shoreline-protec   tion-chicago-20210126-wkkrbm4f2bfktgkna6jewvv3se-story.html .  Accessed January 21, 2021. 84.  Jamasmie  C:  Operations  resume  at  Barrick’s  Veladero  mine.   2016.  Available  at   http: // www.mining.com / operations-resume-at- barricks-veladero-mine /. Accessed January 24, 2021. 85. Castilla J: Barrick faces sanctions for Argentina cyanide spills,  judge  says.  Reuters.  2017.  Available  at   https: // www.reuters.com / article / us-barrick-gold-mine-argentina-exclusive / exclusive-barrick- faces-sanctions-for-argentina-cyanide-spills-judge-says-idUSKBN   1841BK . Accessed March 9, 2021. 86. Hassani A, Melan A, Zawawi MH, et al.: Stability analysis and  cost benefit analysis of the extension retaining wall for Kenyir dam  spillway.  In   International  Conference  on  Dam  Safety  Management   and Engineering . Singapore: Springer, 2019: 671-679. 87. Wekem AC: Adoption of appropriate measures to minimize the  effects of floods on housing in the three Northern regions of Ghana,  the perspective of consultants (Doctoral Dissertation, University of  Education, Winneba), 2015. 88.  International  Organization  for  Migration  (IOM):  Protecting   communities:  IOM’s  humanitarian  assistance  programme  at  work.   2014. Available at  https: // afghanistan.iom.int / feature-stories / protect- ing-communities-ioms-humanitarian-assistance-programme-work .  Accessed January 24, 2021. 89. Cesvi:  Somalia: Gabion Walls for River Embankment . Bergamo,  Italy:  Cesvi—Participatory  Foundation  and  NGO  Italy.  2019.   Available  at   https: // www.cesvi.eu / news / somalia-gabion-walls-for- river-embankment /. Accessed March 9, 2021. 90.  Mulligan  J,  Harper  J,  Kipkemboi  P,  et  al.:  Community- responsive adaptation to flooding in Kibera, Kenya. In  Proceedings  of  the  Institution  of  Civil  Engineers—Engineering  Sustainability .  Vol. 170, No. 5. London: Thomas Telford Ltd, 2016: 268-280. 91.  The  New  Humanitarian:  Flood  abatement  efforts  yield  mixed   results. 2008. Available at  https: // www.thenewhumanitarian.org / fr / node / 242940 . Accessed February 11, 2021. 92. Schanze J, Hutter G, Offert A, et al.:  Systematisation, Evaluation  and  Context  Conditions  of  Structural  and  Non-Structural  Measures   for  Flood  Risk  Reduction .  CRUE  Research  Report  No.  1-1.  London:   CRUE Funding Initiative on Flood Risk Management Research, 2008. 93.  Andjelkovic  I:   Guidelines  on  Non-Structural  Measures  in   Urban Flood Management. International Hydrological Programme  (IHP) .  Paris:  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural   Organization (UNESCO), 2001. 94. Jongman B, Kreibich H, Apel H, et al.: Comparative flood dam- age model assessment: Towards a European approach.  Nat Hazards  Earth Syst Sci . 2012; 12(12): 3733-3752. 95.  Haque  CE,  Azad  MA,  Choudhury  M:  The  discourse  of  flood   management approaches and policies in Bangladesh: Mapping the  changes, drivers, and actors.  Water (Basel) . 2019; 11(12): 2654. 96.  International  Federation  of  the  Red  Cross  (IFRC):  Finding   simple solutions to deal with floods in Bangladesh. 2007. Available  at  https: // www.ifrc.org / ar / noticias / noticias / asia-pacific / bangla- desh / finding-simple-solutions-to-deal-with-floods-in-bangladesh /.  Accessed March 10, 2021. 97.  Kamruzzaman  M,  Shaw  R:  Flood  and  sustainable  agriculture   in  the  Haor  basin  of  Bangladesh:  A  review  paper.   Univ J Agricult  Res . 2018; 6(1): 40-49. 98.  Ali  MH,  Bhattacharya  B,  Islam  AKMS,  et  al.:  Challenges   for  flood  risk  management  in  flood-prone  Sirajganj  region  of   Bangladesh.  J Flood Risk Manag . 2019; 12(1): e12450. 99.   Index   Mundi:   Country   Comparisons—South   Sudan   vs.    Bangladesh.   (n.d.).   Available   at    https: // www.indexmundi.com / factbook / compare / south-sudan.bangladesh .  Accessed  February  11,   2021. SA-Weston-JEM#210083.indd   136 26/07/22   2:15 PM